[db] Add docs for context info propagation (#2236)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/database/database-spans.md

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Propagating context to databases

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

> | Attribute      | Type   | Description                           | Require level     | Stability                                                      |

Reviewer: Maybe we can change this table and name it something like "recommended propagators"?

Author: Added header `Recommended attributes` to make it more intuitive.

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

> ## Propagating context to databases

Reviewer: I think this needs to be marked as an experimental feature (which we call Development)

```suggestion
## Propagating context to databases

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]
```

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to databases.

Reviewer: The propagators are defined here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/context/api-propagators.md#propagators-distribution (and https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/configuration/sdk-environment-variables.md#general-sdk-configuration).

I think this PR could be simplified to

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

together with an example

Author: updated

| Attribute      | Type   | Description                           | Require level     | Stability                                                      |
|----------------|--------|---------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `service.name` | string | Logical name of the service [1]       | `Required`        | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: Why is this needed?

Reviewer 2: I think this is because of the limitation of actual implementation.

When propagating `traceparent` via sqlcommenter is not available for certain databases due to the performance impact (https://github.com/google/sqlcommenter/issues/284) and propagating `traceparent` via `SET CONTEXT_INFO` is also not available due to the additional network round trip delay, only pushing a `service.name` or (`peer.service`) via sqlcommenter become a solution to achieve limited correlation for knowing which service is making the query request.

Some questions here:
- What is the best name to use here? `service.name` or `peer.service`.
- Should we mark this field as `Optional` or `Recommended`?

Author: > Gotcha. In such case `service.name` feels more like a baggage item that you want to propagate. Then it could encoded something like
> 
> ```
> SELECT * FROM songs /* baggage: service.name=music-player:play */
> ```

Updated to use `baggage.service.name` as `baggage: ...` is not allowed in sqlcommenter

Reviewer 3: I agree with the decision to add the service name as a low-cardinality alternative to trace context, but I'm not sure if we should be referencing the baggage concept or name for this attribute name. Typically the service name for a trace/log/metric isn't typically stored in baggage but instead as a resource.

@pellared what do you think of going back to `service.name` or something slightly different like `resource.service.name`?

Reviewer 2: > What do you think about making it conditionally required, where there is not information about span?

@Kielek, it makes sense to me.

---

About baggage, I know there are no other built-in propagators to use, but I am not sure it is the best place to hold additional attributes.

> Updated to use baggage.service.name as baggage: ... is not allowed in sqlcommenter

 @sincejune If we use baggage without additional processing, then it would look like this for `peer.service=bar`

```
/*baggage='peer.service%3Dbar'*/
```

Result from otelsql, https://github.com/XSAM/otelsql/blob/312753965cc288af499887517f050e17460d420a/commenter_test.go#L72

Reviewer: > but I'm not sure if we should be referencing the baggage concept or name for this attribute name. 

We somehow need to propagate this information. I was thinking of reusing some existing propagator, instead of creating a new one. The alternative would be probably creating a new "service name propagator".

However, it feels that a baggage propagator can be used for this. From https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/#example-use-case:

> For example, if you need to annotate logs with some request-specific information, you could propagate a property using the baggage header.

I just noticed that here is a nice doc for context propagation for AWS: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/45e91aedff7d347955ba09269b871f8fd9049ce3/docs/non-normative/compatibility/aws.md#context-propagation

> @pellared what do you think of going back to `service.name` or something slightly different like `resource.service.name`?

:+1: `service.name`  as I originally proposed. Especially that it is already a "reserved" key: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/45e91aedff7d347955ba09269b871f8fd9049ce3/docs/resource/README.md?plain=1#L58

> @pellared, do you know how to express an attribute in baggage in the semantic convention doc?

I think that we just need to write it down as I do not think we have any semantic conventions for baggage key-values so far.

CC @reyang, @dyladan, @yurishkuro, @arminru

Reviewer 4: > What is the best name to use here? service.name or peer.service.
I slightly prefer peer.service.

`service.name`. `peer.service` applies to the remote (downstream service): [link](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/peer/)

Author: Updated to use `peer.service`.

Author: @pellared Do you recommend using the format `/*baggage='service.name%3Dbar'*/` instead of `/*baggage.service.name='bar'*/`? I'm not sure if there is an existing propagator we can use. Just wanted to double-check.

Reviewer: I suggest exploring `/*baggage='service.name%3Dbar'*` and use of the baggage propagator.

Author: @pellared Updated the examples accordingly.

| `traceparent`  | string | The trace context of current span [2] | `Recommended` [3] | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

**[1] `service.name`:** MUST be the same for all instances of horizontally scaled services. If the value was not specified, SDKs MUST fall back to `unknown_service:` concatenated with [process.executable.name](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/process/), e.g. `unknown_service:bash`. If `process.executable.name` is not available, the value MUST be set to `unknown_service`.

**[2] `traceparent`:** MUST be in the [text format](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header).

**[3] `traceparent`:** `tracparent` have extremely high-cardinality. It's RECOMMENDED to propagate this info if the high-cardinality is safe for the behind databases

Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

**Examples:**

- Query with `service.name`:

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM songs /* service.name=music-player:play */
  ```

- Query with `service.name` and `traceparent`

  ```sql

>   SELECT * FROM songs /* service.name=music-player:play, traceparent=00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01 */

Author: URL encoding is required for sqlcommenter value serialization, so this doesn't appear to be an issue: https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/#key-serialization

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Context Propagation

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### SQL commenter

Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/). The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

| Attribute              | Type   | Description                           | Examples | Require level     | Stability                                                      |
|------------------------|--------|---------------------------------------|----------|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|

> | [`service.name`](/docs/registry/attributes/service.md) | string | Logical name of the service [22]   | `shoppingcart` | `Recommended`     | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer 5: this table talks about attributes, but it's under context propagation - I don't understand the suggestion here

> **[22] `service.name`:** Instrumentations MAY use [SDK-provided resource detectors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/#semantic-attributes-with-sdk-provided-default-value) to set the default value for this attribute.

Reviewer 5: instrumentations don't have access to resources - resources are SDK concept and instrumentations only use API

Reviewer 2: Good catch! I forgot this part.

Sounds like `service.name` should be considered a parameter of the instrumentation that users should provide. Until we have an EntityProvider in the future.

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Propagating context to databases

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

> ### Recommended attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended sqlcommenter attributes
```

Just so that people are not confusing it with OTel attributes.

| Attribute              | Type   | Description                           | Require level     | Stability                                                      |
|------------------------|--------|---------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `baggage.service.name` | string | Logical name of the service [1]       | `Required`        | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: If `traceparent` is present I do not think that service.name is needed. Isn't it the best way to have one or another?

Do we even need to define "require level"? Maybe we should just describe the meaning of each sqlcommenter attribute?

Author: > If `traceparent` is present I do not think that service.name is needed. Isn't it the best way to have one or another?

Updated, and I keep the `Require level` to make it as an annotation as well. How do you think about it?

Author: > If `traceparent` is present I do not think that service.name is needed. Isn't it the best way to have one or another?

Updated, and I keep the `Require level` to make it as an annotation as well. What do you think about it?

Reviewer: I am not sure if we need even the require level. I think these are just different propagation options :wink: But we can keep it for now as I think there are other more important comments to be resolved/addressed.

Reviewer 4: > If traceparent is present I do not think that service.name is needed. 

Even if `traceparent` is present, `service.name` is still useful. Exact correlation using `trace_id` requires both a database sample and the full trace for the same request, but because of sampling, many traces and DB executions are missed. Since the chance of both being captured is low (`p_trace * p_db_sample`), including `service.name` helps support approximate correlation when exact matching isn’t possible.

| `traceparent`          | string | The trace context of current span [2] | `Recommended` [3] | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> **[1] `baggage.service.name`:** MUST be the same for all instances of horizontally scaled services. If the value was not specified, SDKs MUST fall back to `unknown_service:` concatenated with [process.executable.name](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/process/), e.g. `unknown_service:bash`. If `process.executable.name` is not available, the value MUST be set to `unknown_service`.

Reviewer: Maybe we should somehow refer to https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage?

**[2] `traceparent`:** MUST be in the [text format](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header).

> **[3] `traceparent`:** `tracparent` have extremely high-cardinality. It's RECOMMENDED to propagate this info if the high-cardinality is safe for the behind databases

Reviewer: trying to figure out some better wording...

```suggestion
**[3] `traceparent`:** `traceparent` has extremely high-cardinality. It's RECOMMENDED to propagate this info if the high-cardinality is safe for the database observabilty engine.
```

MAY specify a different `db.query.summary` format as long as produced summary remains
relatively short and its cardinality remains low comparing to the `db.query.text`.

## Propagating context to databases

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

Reviewer 3: I wanted to share a learning from my org. We've implemented a sqlcommenter-like approach for our instrumentations and we found it more beneficial to _prepend_ the sql comment rather than _append_ to the query text. This runs counter to the sqlcommenter spec, but we found that most databases truncate the query in views like pg_stat_activity, so prepending the attributes offered a better guarantee that they wouldn't be truncated

Author: @zacharycmontoya Thank you for pointing this out!

I think it makes sense to prepend the sql comment instead. I'll update this PR accordingly if there are no objections. cc @open-telemetry/semconv-db-approvers @XSAM

Reviewer 2: Using prepend conflicts the spec of sql commenter.

@zacharycmontoya Could you elaborate more about this? How serious and often the truncate will happen to certain databases if we use append.

Reviewer 4: Postgres [limits query text to 1024 characters by default](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/monitoring-stats.html#MONITORING-PG-STAT-ACTIVITY-VIEW), but you can increase it.

Author: Another idea is to make it flexible by allowing the implementation of propagation for a specific database to choose between `append` or `prepend`.

Author: Modify this PR to incorporate the idea.

Author: Modified this PR to incorporate the idea.

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [sqlcommenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

Reviewer 6: I'm concerned about pushing this as a standard in light of https://github.com/google/sqlcommenter/issues/284

Author: The plan is to use `sqlcommenter` only with attributes that do not change frequently. In the SQL Server documentation, I have added the section below. @trask Does this plan seem good to you?

> Instrumentations SHOULD make use of [SET CONTEXT_INFO](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/t-sql/statements/set-context-info-transact-sql?view=sql-server-ver16) to add high-cardinality information(e.g. `traceparent`) as adding sql comments to queries changes their unique identifier in SQL Server.

Author: @lmolkova The `traceparent` format is more widely used, so I prefer adopting that. What are your thoughts?

**[1] `baggage.service.name`:** MUST be the same for all instances of horizontally scaled services. If the value was not specified, SDKs MUST fall back to `unknown_service:` concatenated with [process.executable.name](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/attributes-registry/process/), e.g. `unknown_service:bash`. If `process.executable.name` is not available, the value MUST be set to `unknown_service`.

[Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) means you can pass data across services and processes, making it available to add to traces, metrics, or logs in those services.

**[2] `baggage.service.name`:** SHOULD be set if `traceparent` cannot be injected due to performance issues.

**[3] `traceparent`:** MUST be in the [text format](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header).

**[4] `traceparent`:** `traceparent` has extremely high-cardinality. It's RECOMMENDED to propagate this info if the high-cardinality is safe for the database observabilty engine.

**Examples:**

- Query with `baggage.service.name`:

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM songs /* baggage.service.name=music-player%3Aplay */
  ```

- Query with `baggage.service.name` and `traceparent`

  ```sql

>   SELECT * FROM songs /* baggage.service.name=music-player%3Aplay, traceparent=00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01 */

Reviewer 3: Per the sqlcomment spec, the values should be wrapped with a `'` character, so I think this suggestion is a more accurate output (this applies to the previous example as well):

```suggestion
  SELECT * FROM songs /* baggage.service.name='music-player%3Aplay', traceparent='00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01' */
```

### SQL commenter

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/). The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

Reviewer 2: I think we will need a following discussion of https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2236#discussion_r2078566667.

I did a small experiment on postgres `17.5` by running two long queries with different comments style more than 1024 bytes.

For instance:
- For **prepend** comment, I ran `/*foo='content longer than 1024 bytes...'*/ SELECT state,query FROM pg_stat_activity;`
- For **append** comment, I ran `SELECT state,query FROM pg_stat_activity /*foo='content longer than 1024 bytes...'*/;`

The result I got from `pg_stat_activity` shows both queries get truncated.

- For **prepend** comment, I got `/*foo='content longer than 1024 bytes...`
  - Only the truncated comment is left.
- For **append** comment, I got `SELECT state,query FROM pg_stat_activity /*foo='content longer than 1024 bytes...`
  - Query remains untouched, as it is very short, but comment is also truncated.

So, postgres seems truncate anything more than 1024 bytes on `pg_stat_activity` whatever it is the query statement or comments. That means no matter the comments, a query that is more 1024 bytes is going to be truncated.

## Comparing these two approaches

### prepend

Pros:
- Always keep the comments. Propagated info won't be lost.

Cons:
- When truncating happens, the query statement get truncated.
  - Users won't see a complete query, and the correlation based on query text may not work.
- It breaks [pg_hint_plan](http://pg-hint-plan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/description.html#basic-usage) functionality https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2236#discussion_r2084548720. So the instrumentation needs to actively detect a hint. (though I was not able to reproduce the issue, the hint plans I got are always the same)

### append

Pros:
- Original query is kept (assuming the query itself won't be truncated)

Cons:
- Comments might be truncated. Propagated info is lost.

---

In short, assuming **prepend** can break `pg_hint_plan` while **append** won't. **append** seems better for easy implementation. About the truncate part, we could use `ALTER SYSTEM SET track_activity_query_size = 16384;` to increase the limit (though it needs a restart to be effective)

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/). The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

Reviewer 5: I do not agree with this statement:

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).

1. recommending instrumentations to modify SQL queries by default is dangerous and questionable
2. it ruins prepared statements and caches for most database systems

We can document other context propagation mechanisms (like there is something for MS SQL and postgres) for these specific databases.
It'd be ok-ish with having it opt-in for other instrumentations.

> Instrumentations SHOULD propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/). The instrumentation implementation MAY choose to either **append** the comment to the end of the query or **prepend** the comment at the beginning of the query, depending on the specific database system's requirements or preferences.

Reviewer 2: > It'd be ok-ish with having it opt-in for other instrumentation.

Is it ok to doc `Instrumentations MAY propagate the context information to the SQL queries following [SQL commenter](https://google.github.io/sqlcommenter/spec/).` Use `MAY` and an annotation to express that it is an opt-in behavior?

I can also move it to MS SQL if you prefer, though I want to have a unified way to propagate context information.
